From the New York Times, I'm [music]
Rachel Abrams and this is the Daily.
Robert F. Kennedy [music] Jr. has
repeatedly cited the skyrocketing autism
rates as central to his mission as
[music] Health and Human Services
Secretary. He's laid the blame at the
feet of everything from Tylenol to
vaccines, and he recently [music]
instructed the CDC to abandon its
long-standing position that the latter
do not cause [music] autism. But while
the rates of autism have increased in
recent decades, the reasons [music] are
more complicated than what Kennedy has
presented.
Today, Azen Gures explains what's really
driving the [music] increase in
diagnosis.
It's Monday, November 24th.
So Azine, the Make America Healthy Again
movement and RFK in particular have
really put autism in the spotlight. RFK
Jr. of course has called autism an
epidemic. And I think it is fair to say
that he has instilled a lot of fear in
people about what the root causes of
autism are.
>> And you've spent a lot of time thinking
about this as part of your reporting.
And so that's where I'd like to start.
And in particular, I want to talk about
the numbers.
>> Yeah. So, autism diagnoses among
children in the United States have been
rising pretty consistently for decades.
In the year 2000, which is the first
year that the CDC started collecting
data on this question, they found that
one in 158-y olds in the United States
had an autism diagnosis. That number has
risen consistently every year that they
have published their report. And the
most recent data that they published,
which came out this year, found that one
in 31year-olds
has an autism diagnosis.
>> So it goes from 1 in 150 to one in every
31 children.
>> Yeah. And I mean, that's a huge
increase, right? And RFK really frames
this as an epidemic. He says, you know,
there's something in our environment
that is causing autism to spread like
wildfire, but that's misleading. You
know, from all the experts that I've
spoken to, they've acknowledged that
there are environmental factors that
likely interact with our genetics that
are contributing to the rise in autism.
You know, there's things like pollution,
for example, people choosing to have
children later in life, but those are
ultimately a really small part of the
explanation for this rise. And the
biggest reason that we know of that is
driving this increase actually has to do
with how we define what autism is. And
that definition has been expanding over
the last several decades.
>> So basically, you're saying that the
tent has gotten bigger, but not
necessarily because there is a true
fundamental increase in the number of
people who have autism, even if that's
part of it. It's that more people are
being captured within this expanding
definition.
>> Yes. But there has been a growing fight
over whether this tent has grown too
large. These are fights over resources.
their fights over research priorities.
Parents, activists, doctors, scientists
who are researching this are starting to
really grapple with whether
everyone in the community is getting
what they need given that the needs of
people under this very broad tent can be
very different.
And one of the people I've been talking
to for a while about these rising
tensions is this psychologist named
Kathy Lord. Her career basically tracks
our understanding of autism. She is a
legendary autism researcher. She has
been actively involved in defining
criteria for the disorder. So, she's
really been at the center of a lot of
this change.
>> Tell me a little bit about her and sort
of her backstory.
>> So, she is a clinical psychologist. Hi,
Kathy.
>> Hello.
>> She's at UCLA. She has spent her whole
career studying and working with people
with autism.
>> What What drew you to the field of
autism in the first place? I think I
like the kids. I just thought they're so
interesting.
>> Kathy in the 1970s as an undergrad
started working with children who had
what today we would call autism.
>> The kids that I saw then, we assumed
they were not verbal. We assumed they
couldn't talk. They did not look at us.
>> The kids that Kathy was seeing, many of
them had intellectual disabilities. Some
of the kids would be rocking back and
forth, avoiding eye contact. Many of
them wouldn't talk, couldn't talk, or
even would just repeat what was said
back to them.
>> We didn't understand why would a child
be moving their fingers in an unusual
way like starfish or why were they upset
when they, you know, someone put
something down in a place that they
hadn't expected it to be. And at the
time, psychologists and psychiatrists
thought maybe this was a form of
schizophrenia.
>> So, originally it was both considered
childhood schizophrenia or infantile
psychosis.
>> Why did they think why did they think it
fit the profile of schizophrenia or
psychosis?
>> I think part of it is that we use the
term psychosis when people do things
that we don't understand.
>> And what were the clinicians telling the
families like telling the parents and
what kind of treatment were they
suggesting
>> that they hadn't? Yeah. So at that time
parents were basically told that there
was nothing that can be done.
>> You know, don't even try. Just send them
away
>> and that they should send their kids
away and live your life because they'll
never be able to do anything, which is
not true. But that is what people were
telling them.
>> It was really in the heyday of a pretty
dark period in psychiatry history where
institutionalization was very common.
kids were sent off to often state-run
institutions where they were basically
hidden from society.
>> So when and how does that start to
change?
>> So yeah, when Kathy was entering the
field, this is a time when there was a
shift away from thinking that these kids
could not be helped to realizing that
actually there were things that
psychologists could do that could help
these kids. How do I both adjust the
world around them, but also how do I
give them tools for example to
communicate that would allow them to
learn? And as this shift is underway in
the year 1980, autism gets added to the
diagnostic and statistical manual of
mental disorders. And this is considered
the bible of psychiatry. The fact that
the diagnosis was added in that year was
really significant. So this is the first
time autism is officially recognized as
a diagnosis. Where does it go from
there?
>> Yeah. So at the time the definition for
autism was very narrow. The DSM said
that the essential features were a lack
of responsiveness to other people,
language problems, and quote bizarre
responses to various aspects of the
environment. And all of that had to
develop in the first 30 months of their
lives. The DSM specifically said that
autism was considered very rare and it
estimated that something like 2 to four
kids in every 10,000 would have this
diagnosis.
>> But pretty much from the get- go there
were questions around what autism
actually was, how it should be defined.
>> [music]
>> We were thinking that wait a minute
there are people that don't have
language delays but who actually have
some of the same social difficulties
that autistic kids have. Clinicians were
asking really sharp questions about what
autism really was. They were asking what
if a kid does not have a language delay?
What if they are able to speak but they
speak differently? And I think also
people were more aware that cognitive
disabilities like intellectual
disabilities are a feature but they're
not always there for autism. Not
everybody with autism has an
intellectual disability.
>> How do we sort of draw lines around this
disorder when there seem to be all sorts
of kids with sort of different
manifestations of what seems like the
same thing?
>> We then said, "Wait a minute. we need to
make this broader.
>> And that's sort of when this idea of the
autism spectrum gets [music] introduced
for the first time that maybe this is
sort of a continuum of traits and
[music] we're thinking a little too
narrowly in the definition of autism
that we have.
So the way the medical community deals
with this is in 1994 two really big
changes happen. one they loosen the
criteria for autism itself and second
they create a new related diagnosis
called Asperers and that sort of
captures a lot of the edge cases that we
were just talking about. So it's the
first step in really a broadening of
what we think of as the sort of
constellation of autism. So does
broadening the definition and also
capturing this other group of kids does
that help settle the question of what
autism is and isn't? I mean, it was
supposed to, but then Kathy does this
research that attempts to look at how
people are actually being diagnosed.
>> We did a study where thousands of kids
were seen and all given the same
diagnostic batteries.
>> And she finds that asberers in
particular is a really squishy
diagnosis. that what determines whether
a child would get diagnosed with
Asberers had more to do with, you know,
what clinician they saw than what
criteria they met.
>> But the clinic in the Midwest would say
somebody had autism and a clinic in the
East Coast would say they had Asperers.
>> It made clear that these definitions are
still not specific enough and they're
not reliable. It was very confusing and
resulted in kids who often over a
lifetime might get an autism diagnosis,
then an asberers diagnosis, and then
sometimes have to come back to an autism
diagnosis. So, it really seemed like
scientifically
this is not useful. Diagnoses matter
because diagnoses are the key to getting
the specific medical attention that you
need to getting the specific services at
school that are going to help support
you. A diagnosis is also key for
insurance coverage for behavioral
therapy and then they also matter at the
level of how a person and their family
conceives of who they are and what
they're struggling with. So it sounds
like it's both meaningful personally but
also quite meaningful in terms of
resources as you mentioned like there
are meaningful stakes here for the
people involved in terms of what they
get access to whether it's healthcare or
school resources or beyond.
>> Yes, exactly. And so that led to the
medical community rethinking once again
how they are defining autism. And so in
2013 Kathy was actually on the committee
that made this change. Basically what
they decided was these lines that we're
drawing are not reliable. They're not
consistent. And the way that they
decided to resolve this issue was to
fold everything together under one
single diagnosis. So autism spectrum
disorder. And that meant that the kids
who were severely disabled, the kids who
maybe couldn't speak or maybe had an
intellectual disability had the same
diagnosis as someone who would have
formerly been diagnosed with Asperers.
>> So basically Aspberers as a category is
getting eliminated. The definition of
autism is expanding and the whole tent
basically is getting bigger.
>> Mhm. And it's being recognized as a
single tent. You know, before I think
there was recognition like these things
are related to each other. Now it's
being viewed as one thing, one group of
people. And sort of in parallel to the
changes that we've been talking about,
there was also the growth of what became
known as the neurodiversity movement.
[music]
This movement was really about beginning
to view autism through a different lens
and rejecting the idea that it was a
disease in need of a cure.
I think I'll start out and just talk a
little bit about what exactly autism is.
Autism is a very big continuum.
>> Often the advocates in the
neurodiversity movement like Temple
Grandon were on the milder end of the
spectrum or you know would have formerly
had an Asberger's diagnosis.
>> Einstein and Mozart and Tesla would all
be probably diagnosed as autistic
spectrum today.
>> And they emphasized [music] that many of
these traits instead of being seen as
pathologies, they could be seen as just
differences. You know, sometimes they
even referred to them [music] as
superpower that they could be things
that made a person, an autistic person,
see the world in a different way that
was actually really valuable to [music]
society.
>> Literally in our investment committee
meetings, uh, we talk about whether or
not this founder has the right balance
of RZ and Tis. [music]
>> Mark Zuckerberg's sister is quoted as
saying that, you know, to succeed in the
technology industry, you need a little
bit of the RZ and a little bit of the
Tis. rez being charisma and tis being
autism.
>> Neurode divergence is a superpower. Uh
and we look for people that live their
lives differently. And I think it also
represents uh an intensity and
directness.
[music]
>> Downstream from the efforts of those
early activists was just a broader
awareness and [music] embrace of autism
in society.
>> I'm actually making history tonight as
the first person with Asberers to host
SNL. You have that at the level of Elon
Musk going on Saturday Night Live and
saying at the time that he had an
Asperger's diagnosis
>> or at least the first to admit it.
>> So, we'll make a lot of eye contact with
the cast tonight.
>> There's sort of a cultural embrace of
autism that, you know, extends to media
and TV. We have, you know, the Big Bang
Theory.
>> I realize you're also on your own
tonight. So, if at some point you find
yourself with nothing to do, please do
not disturb me. [laughter]
>> Love on the spectrum. I can't I can't
think can't think of anything to say
about but I'm still having a good time.
>> Me too.
>> Do you think we have a character with
autism on Sesame Street?
>> Julia doesn't say a lot.
>> That's right. And she may not do what
you expect like give you a high five.
>> Yeah. She does things just a little
differently.
>> So it's really this movement away from
stigmatizing autism and being in some
cases proud of autism as a label.
>> [music]
>> It's really striking, Azine, how the
label autistic has really changed so
dramatically just in my lifetime.
[snorts] Yeah, I think this is all
really a victory for the neurodiversity
movement. And the stigma begins to fade
so much that for a lot of families, it
actually becomes desirable in some ways
to have a diagnosis for your kid if they
have some of these struggles. it
actually becomes a way for them to be
validated and again, you know, be able
to access resources that might be able
to help them.
But [music] all of these changes, the
increase in diagnosis and and the really
increased awareness, all of this ends up
leading to a lot of unintended
consequences for the autism community
itself.
[music]
We'll be right back.
So Azim, before the break, you mentioned
that the widening group of people
diagnosed with autism had unintended
consequences. Explain what those were.
So while broadening the tent did expand
access to help for a huge number of
people, it also brought in many
different kinds of people with many
different kinds of needs. And that has
raised these tensions over which of
those needs get prioritized in a world
where there's a really limited pile of
resources to help. And there's two
really big areas where we see this. And
the first is schools. M
>> you know I spoke with a lot of families
who had kids with severe autism who said
that as the number of kids with less
severe disabilities has increased so
much over the years. It's made it harder
to access school services that are
actually geared towards their kids.
Their kids needing a lot more help and a
lot more support to get through the day.
I talked to parents who said that their
kids had been kicked out of multiple
schools. Basically, they're being told
their kids are too autistic to be in the
classrooms that are actually designated
for kids with autism. I spoke with
another parent who talked about having
to actually pull her son out of a school
where he was aloping, the word for
running away, which is a common problem
among kids with severe autism. And the
school didn't have gates. It was just
not a safe environment for him. Um, and
there was actually a survey that was
conducted by the National Council for
Severe Autism that found that, you know,
of the 800 parents that they surveyed,
80% said that they had been told that
their kid was actually too disruptive
even for programs that were geared
towards kids with autism. So, these
families are really frustrated because
the pool of resources is not expanding
at the same rate as the number of
children with autism is expanding. and
they're actually finding it harder to
get the help that they need for their
kids and their kids need a lot of help.
>> What is striking me here is that years
of work went into dstigmatizing autism
and the end result of that is that you
have people increasingly being included
in different aspects of society,
included in schools, included in
classes, being prouder to talk openly
about their condition. However, that has
also meant more people competing for a
finite number of resources. And the
irony of this is that the net effect
seems to be that the students with the
most severe needs are being excluded
from places like the classroom as you
mentioned because they are being told we
simply do not have the resources to
support you in this environment and
you're going to need to go elsewhere.
>> Yeah, absolutely. And I've heard that
from countless parents of kids with
severe autism. M
>> we've seen a really similar thing play
out in terms of autism research. Even as
the amount of money that has gone
towards researching autism has grown
substantially year-over-year, we've
actually seen a decrease in studies that
are focused on people with the most
severe impairments. M
>> I spoke with a child psychiatrist in
Boston who actually did a review of all
treatment studies from 1991 to 2013 and
he found that the proportion of studies
that included participants with severe
autism declined from something like 95%
of the studies to just 35%.
And this is being driven by some very
sort of logistical factors and a sort of
perspective on how this research should
be approached. You know, a person with
severe profound autism can't go online
and fill out a survey.
>> You know, that's a really easy way to
get data on large groups of people is to
have them fill out online surveys. They
also can't go sit in a brain scan
machine that is loudly humming for an
hour. And at the same time, the research
priorities around autistic people's
lives have moved away from the sort of
questions that are seeking a cure or or
a treatment for autism and more towards
the sorts of questions and concerns that
are of a lot more importance to people
on the milder end of the spectrum. So
questions around mental health or or
employment. And you know, the parents of
the severely autistic kids who I spoke
with said those concerns do not relate
in any way to their kids' lives. You
know, their kids are struggling with
things like eating or or learning how to
talk,
>> right? Employment is not going to be an
option for these families. They have
different concerns.
>> For a lot of them, it won't be. So, this
group being lumped together has led to a
lot of disagreements over how to
approach these problems. It sounds like
a lot of the discussion that you're
describing is actually not about trying
to understand what autism is. It's
actually about what kind of resources
those designations unlock for families.
And I can imagine that that could maybe
pit families against one another. Is
that going a step too far? No, I think
that is definitely a dynamic that is
playing out. I think the dividing line
in the community is a little more
complicated than that too in that it's
really these parents of the kids with
severe autism who are now at odds with
activists who are self- advocates who
are autistic people themselves who say
you know we have a shared experience as
members of the autistic community that
you can't understand and I think that is
a really difficult dynamic that has
played out in this community is who gets
to speak for the community when there
are such broad needs and the people on
the most severe end of the spectrum
often cannot speak for themselves.
[music]
>> Kathy, was there sort of a moment in
your own practice where you realized
there might have been a downside to this
expansion? Like this is having some
negative consequences that we didn't
prepare ourselves for.
>> Yes, I I think so. And Kathy has this
experience as well on a committee where
they are discussing housing for autistic
people.
>> And there was an autism self- advocate
and then a bunch of other people from
different agencies. and she is on the
committee with an autistic self-
advocate who is really pushing against
the idea of group homes, arguing that
basically it's taking us back to the
dark days of psychiatric
institutionalization that we've really
moved away from.
>> When I say group home, I'm thinking of
like four or five people who live in a
house with like two other people who are
helping take care of them.
>> And she has this realization. I felt
like they didn't understand that these
are people that have nowhere to live
except with their parents who are
getting older and can't take care of
them.
>> She felt like that the self- advocate
did not understand that this is for
people who have the most severe needs,
who do need roundthe-clock care, who
cannot live independently. But I think
the idea that they were representing
autism
as if they [music] were experts on all
forms of autism, that was certainly
something that I had a hard time [music]
with that I won't forget.
And she talks about how that experience
really made her worry about who gets to
speak for the experience of autism, who
gets to make choices for that community,
who gets represented, who gets resources
has been made much more difficult by
just how broad the range of experience
contained in this diagnosis has now
become. So, as Kathy sees these
unintended consequences playing out,
what does she see as the solution?
Can you talk about the the proposal of
this category of profound autism? Sort
of when that came to be and then
obviously your involvement in it, too.
>> Yeah. So, we were I mean, Lanced offered
us the opportunity to set up an
international commission across
disciplines. Kathy and a group of other
researchers and clinicians and autism
advocates have actually been over the
last several years proposing that
perhaps there needs to be a separate
category for the people with the most
severe disabilities. So she in 2021 is
leading this thing called the Lancet
Commission.
>> Wow. So basically it sounds like she's
undoing the work that she's backed for
decades in order to broaden the
category.
>> Yes, in a way. And then there was a lot
of discussion about what on earth we
call this.
>> What this group of experts ends up
proposing is a separate category that is
called profound autism. And the way they
defined it is having minimal or no
ability to speak or an IQ of less than
50 or both and requiring 24-hour access
to a caregiver. So, it's really about
recognizing that there is a part of this
population with very severe needs and
and having a label so that that group of
people can be identified. So,
essentially after years of expanding
this definition, Kathy is now proposing
something that would chop up the
spectrum once again.
But what would the practical effect of
that be of that cleaving off of one
other group? First, this is not a actual
diagnosis that has been proposed.
Profound autism is a label that has
casually grown in use over the years. I
hear clinicians using it all the time.
The reason to have this label, I think,
ultimately boils down to recognition.
So, recognition that this is a group of
individuals with really severe needs.
The roundthe-clock care being right
there as part of the definition, I
think, tells you a lot. And I think
flowing out from that is the hope that
this will be a group that will be able
to get more in terms of the services
that their families have really
struggled to get for them over the
years.
>> But for now at least, even if they were
to cleave this off into a separate
category, it's not like it would direct
resources to some of these people that
need it most.
>> Yeah, I I think that's certainly the
hope, but I don't think we know. And you
know, it's definitely not clear that
this is going to be a magic solution
that fixes these issues that Kathy and
others have identified.
>> Given all of these consequences that we
have talked about and this lopsided
allocation of resources that some
parents have pointed toward, does Kathy
think it was a mistake to broaden the
diagnosis just especially given that
she's trying to undo some of that now? I
asked her if she regretted in any way
the sort of role that she played in
expanding the diagnosis.
>> I do think it has backfired to some
degree.
>> I think there's broad recognition and
Kathy certainly also recognizes that
>> folding everything under one diagnosis
hasn't worked.
>> The whole idea of autism awareness,
those are things that are really good.
But I do think that we have contributed
unwittingly to having diagnosis that are
very complicated.
What is not clear is what will work and
what will fix the problems that they
were trying to solve for in the first
place without leaving anyone behind. The
parents of kids with profound autism
maybe will be satisfied by having a
distinct diagnosis, but that still
leaves a lot of people with wide range
of needs. Kathy is also worried about
>> I mean I I don't know what to do, you
know, how how to solve this because I
think the solution is not linear. It's
not going to be you're in this group,
you're in that group there. I mean there
there aren't two groups. [laughter] I
don't think we could agree on three
groups or four groups. I also spoke with
autistic self- advocates who are really
worried about if the diagnosis is split
apart. The message that that sends is
that the people who don't have profound
autism don't have autism at all. And I
think there's a real fear about that
support being lost that then we will be
dividing the spectrum up into people
with real autism and not real autism.
And I think that's a real concern too.
>> How do we how do we move forward? I I
don't know.
Kathy, [music] thank you so much for
taking all this time and for walking us
through all of this. No, thank you.
It feels a little bit like a sad irony
that there have been so many people like
Kathy who worked so hard to get people
help and in the [music] process
destigmatized this diagnosis of autism
and expanded what it means and in so
doing they now fear that that work might
have harmed some of the people who
needed it most. And [music]
it is not clear what any real solution
for everybody in this community could
look like. [music]
Yeah, you know, having this separate
category made for profound autism will
maybe solve some of the problems that
we've been talking about, but it still
leaves [music] a lot of unanswered
questions about where's the line between
a disability and [music] a difference.
Who should be speaking for a community
that is [music] as broad as this one?
Where are diagnoses helpful? And where
can they in [music] some cases cause
harm? I think these are a lot of
questions that the field of psychiatry
in general is wrestling with right now
and I think those are still unanswered.
[music]
>> Azine, [music] thank you so much.
>> Yeah, thanks for having me.
>> [music]
>> We'll be right back.
[music] Here's what else you need to
know today. I have too much self-respect
and dignity. I love my family way too
much. and I do not want my sweet
district to have to endure a hurtful and
hateful primary [music]
against me by the president that we all
fought for. In a stunning announcement
late Friday, [music] Congresswoman
Marjgerie Taylor Green, once one of
President Trump's most loyal allies,
[music]
said she would resign from Congress in
January. Green kept her plans tightly
under wraps, surprising some of even her
closest colleagues. Loyalty should be a
twoway street, [music] and we should be
able to vote our conscience and
represent our district's interests
because our job title is [music]
literally representative. Her
announcement came days after President
Trump branded [music] Green as a traitor
because of her efforts to release the
Department of Justice's files related to
Jeffrey Epstein. Standing up for
American women who were raped at 14
years old, trafficked and used by rich,
powerful men should not result in me
[music] being called a traitor, and
threatened by the president of the
United States.
>> She also [music] said that her time in
Congress came with an onslaught of
attacks and death threats, and that her
own alienation [music] from the
Republican party meant the inevitability
of the alienation of the MAGA base. In
an interview [music] with ABC News,
Trump called Green's plans to retire
early great news for the country.
Today's episode was produced by Alex
[music] Stern and Nina Feldman with help
from Diana Wyn, Jessica Chung, and Ricky
Netsky. It was edited by MJ Davis Lynn
[music] with help from Patricia Willins.
Contains music by Marian Lozano, Pat
McCusker, Diane Wong, [music] and Dan
Powell, and was engineered by Chris
Wood.
>> [music]
>> That's it [music] for the daily. I'm
Rachel Abrams. See you tomorrow.